<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII: The Sailing of the Fleet</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Sailing of the Fleet</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>When it was given out by what agreement King Harald and Styrbiorn were made friends men wondered much, thinking that here was a new strong wind set in, to blow so suddenly away that old standing bridal pact made with King Burisleif. The King’s men for the most part thought that he had shown wisdom in these dealings, and in a day or two were all quarrels forgot that had arisen betwixt the Dane-folk and them of Jom; and most men accounted this to Styrbiorn. And they marked how even the King himself seemed, in outward show at least, of one mind with Styrbiorn and entreated him as he had been his very son. Styrbiorn and Thyri were wed now without more ado.</p>
			<p>Now was the time come near for their keeping tryst with Palnatoki, and Styrbiorn sent Biorn Asbrandson his foster-brother to Jomsburg to let Palnatoki know they were with King Harald and how that affair had sped, so that Palnatoki might come now with all his power of fighting ships to Styrbiorn in Alaburg, instead of waiting for him in Jomsburg as they before determined. For this was in Styrbiorn’s mind now, that they should sail that summer west over England’s-main and lay under them those western lands. Men spoke well of the choice of land there, and the land was called a good land and worth the harrying.</p>
			<p>In due time came Biorn back alone. He had this to say: that Palnatoki was there indeed in Jomsburg with his host, and had besides a great multitude of men and ships gathered from the east; but when he would have had these follow him to Alaburg, then said they all that they were come thither to Jomsburg to meet with Styrbiorn, and that they were not minded to go thence at any man’s bidding until Styrbiorn should come to fetch them; but that when he should come, then they would go with him whithersoever he would, and do his commands. Styrbiorn saw there was naught for it but he must fare to Jomsburg. That was the tenth night now of their guesting with King Harald in Alaburg. They sat at supper, and Styrbiorn was glad and merry as he had not been these many months.</p>
			<p>It was wonderful stormy weather that night, and it so befell that there was sailing by the Jutland coast a little north of the east mouth of the Limfirth a man of Iceland bound south out of the Swede-realm on a cheaping voyage. The wind and the sea drave his ship aland and she was broken in pieces in the shallows, but the skipper and his ship’s company saved themselves and came ashore. That was about sunset. This chapman was named Worm Grimkelson. Oft had he sailed a-cheaping into the land of the Danes aforetime, and it was ever King Harald’s wont to make him welcome. There was no dwellings of men thereabouts whereas Worm and his shipmates were come ashore, so they took this rede, to make haste to Alaburg and crave shelter of Harald the King. They fell in with no man on their way thither through the wind and rain, and so it was that when Worm came into the hall and stood before the King and gave him greeting he knew not at all that these were Jomsburgers a-guesting there with King Harald, nor that Styrbiorn was there; nor was Styrbiorn known to him by sight nor any of those that were with him.</p>
			<p>The King bade thralls look to Worm’s men and give them to eat and drink, but for Worm himself the King let make room at the board. The King asked him was there good cheaping this year, and Worm answered it was better than some years and worse than others. The King asked whence they were come, and Worm answered they were come from Sigtun.</p>
			<p>“Thou art the first man this year, Worm,” said King Harald, “to come south hither out of the Swede-realm. What tidings hast thou to tell us thence? For I think it good sport to hear tales and tidings a-nights when men have eaten and supped.”</p>
			<p>The chapman answered and said, “There is naught newer, Lord, than that which befell last summer’s end, when Styrbiorn the Strong was fled away out of Sweden because of King Eric, and the King let crown his young son Olaf joint King with him in Styrbiorn’s stead. And he is called Olaf the Lap-King, because he was crowned a-sitting in his mother’s lap, being but two winters old as is said. And this is in every man’s mouth there, and is thought great tidings in the realm of Sweden.”</p>
			<p>King Harald’s face was lighted with a smile full of evil will. “These be tidings indeed,” said he. “Take heed and rule thy speech, though for yonder in the high seat sitteth Styrbiorn the Strong, and I thought thou hadst known him, having thyself ere now fared a-cheaping in the Swede-realm.”</p>
			<p>The chapman’s knees were loosened when he understood that this was Styrbiorn. And now were all men’s eyes turned on Styrbiorn to see how he would take these news. Now so it was that at the first naming of his name by the chapman Styrbiorn waxed red to the ears and the roots of his hair. But when he heard of the crowning of Olaf the Lap-King he turned white with anger. He was leaned forth over the table on his elbows, with nostrils wide and in his eyes a light like as is in a lynx’s eyes about to spring. He had in his right hand in that instant an ale-horn, and so mightily his hand shut on the horn that the horn cracked and burst under his handgrip and the ale was wasted on the board. The chapman was afeared beholding him, and all men beheld him with some dread, for he seemed like to a man with the berserk-gang upon him, and well they deemed that that should be the bane of many a man there if Styrbiorn should break forth in that kind amongst them. So for a full minute’s space not a man stirred nor spake in that hall, gazing all on Styrbiorn. Then, seeming to master himself, he spake and said, “When was this crowning?”</p>
			<p>“Lord,” answered the chapman, shaking and trembling, “they told me that was the third day after your going out from Upsala.”</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn smote down with a crash on the table the crushed ale-horn and threw back his head with a great laugh. Men thought there was naught good in the sound of that laughter. Then he drew from his arm a ring of gold, heavy and broad, and tossed it to Worm saying, “There’s thanks for thy news of the Lap-King.” Then he rose up and took by the hand Thyri, that was somewhat pale and shaken with these things. “Come, sweetheart,” said he, “let’s to bed. I must sail at daybreak for Jomsburg.”</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn busked him for the east next day at sunrise with nine ships. Ere he set forth he talked nigh an hour secretly with Biorn in Biorn’s shut bed afore that men were astir. Biorn fared with him and Bessi Thorlakson. The rest of the host he set under the command of Bui the Thick, and bade them await his coming thither again to Alaburg, and that should be on the thirtieth day. King Harald noted these things. He was eager to know what Styrbiorn meant to do, but Styrbiorn would tell him nothing, only bidding him wait for him in Alaburg. “And what of Thyri?” said the King. “That thou shouldst sicken of her after a seven-nights’ turtle-doving is a strange unheard of thing.”</p>
			<p>“Thyri saileth east with me,” he answered.</p>
			<p>“East to Jomsburg?” said the King. “Thou can’st not bring thy wife into Jomsburg. There hath never been any woman brought thither.”</p>
			<p>“That concerneth not thee,” said Styrbiorn.</p>
			<p>The King was very ill content.</p>
			<p>They went aboard now and sailed down the firth. But in Alaburg Harald the King abode ill at ease. Much he questioned Bui and Sigurd and the other lords of the Jomsburgers that were there, but found them but a dry well to draw from. And much he chafed to have sailed away out of the Limfirth with his following nor await Styrbiorn’s return, or by what way soever to be rid of the Jomsburgers. But this seemed naught hopeful, but full of risk. So there he abode, chafing and discontented, and day by day the Dane-folk flocked to him in Alaburg according to the host-bidding he had made at Styrbiorn’s behest up and down the land.</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn came to Jomsburg about noontide the third day. When Palnatoki beheld Thyri there he took Styrbiorn apart and said, “What is this? She must go back. Thou knowest our law, that there shall be no woman brought into Jomsburg.”</p>
			<p>“There shall be now,” said Styrbiorn. His eyes were fierce, and his speech stumbled more than of wont. “All things else that are mine I stake on this throw, to fare north now into Sweden and take it by force. But not her. Her I leave with you in Jomsburg to keep her safe for me. She is the Queen. She is the apple of mine eye, Palnatoki.”</p>
			<p>Palnatoki stood staring at him an instant with his eagle eyes; then, “This is a new turn,” he said. “To Sweden?”</p>
			<p>“I have heard tidings,” said Styrbiorn. “Slow was I to raise war against King Eric. Until now he hath done me good. Thou knowest I abode quiet when the fates of ill luck sundered me and him, albeit he withheld from me my father’s inheritance. I had rather let all go than bear war against him. But now hath he wrought me this shame and evil, to let crown a brat in my stead. And that is as much as to say I shall be cast out of my kingdom forever. And that pat too, without thought or delay, while I near burst myself holding myself in. And now there is no help. It must be tried out now whether he or I be the stronger, and which of us must be King in Upsala.”</p>
			<p>Palnatoki took him by the hand. “I will do this for thee, Styrbiorn,” he said. “And it is a thing I would not do for any other man, nor for myself neither. She shall come in. And now we must take rede for these greater matters.”</p>
			<p>In such wise was Queen Thyri taken into Jomsburg. Twenty-two days they abode there fitting out their ships and mustering the Wendland levies and others from those eastern parts which Styrbiorn had of late laid under him, till there were well nigh six score ships, both great ships and small, all manned and armed in Jomsburg harbour. At dawn of the twenty-third day they went ashipboard. It was a grey and misty morning, windless, with a drizzle of rain in the air. Styrbiorn came down to the ships with Palnatoki and Sigvaldi. Sigvaldi was to bide in Jomsburg as captain there. Palnatoki had been sick of a sickness these four or five days past, but there was no holding him from faring with Styrbiorn.</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn had bound raven’s wings on his helm. When Sigvaldi saw it, he said, “Some men would say thou wast fey, Styrbiorn, seeing thee commit so proud a blasphemy as bear raven’s wings on thy helm. For this is a thing befitteth no man, nor yet the lesser Gods neither, but the All-Father alone. If thou wilt be counseled by me, leave them off. For well I think they shall bring us ill luck.”</p>
			<p>“They shall be taken off,” answered he, “when they shall be hewn off in battle before Upsala. Or when I sit King there. No other way.”</p>
			<p>“I counsel thee,” said Sigvaldi, “out of my love and loyalty. A man might say, to look on thee, thou hadst now clapt up thy good luck in a cage of gold. But I feared thee less in thy mad melancholy discontents last winter.”</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn laughed. “A doomed man’s ice-hole,” he said, “is never frozen. Have done with thy womanish fears.”</p>
			<p>But now befell this misfortune, that Palnatoki going, aboard of his ship slipped foot and fell and brake his leg there. Men thought this a strange ill hap. Spite of this, and his sickness yet heavy upon him, Palnatoki would not be left behind; till in the end Styrbiorn got his way with him, that he being unmeet for battle should stay this while in Jomsburg and let Sigvaldi fare in his stead with Styrbiorn into Sweden. There were men that laid their heads together, seeing in this thing an omen, and in the raven’s wings. But most of them trowed so much in their own might and main and in Styrbiorn that they were in no mind to quiddle upon such light matters as these. Sigvaldi held his peace, and busked him without more ado to sail in Palnatoki’s stead. But men who knew him thought they knew that his heart was not in that sailing.</p>
			<p>Thyri came down with them to the ships. She was brave and jolly of mien. But Biorn bethought him now of her dream in Roiskeld two years since; and he thought he knew she was finding it hard to put on so blithe a face and press down her fears, seeing her lord now in very earnest about faring North with a great host of war.</p>
			<p>They rowed out now from Jomsburg sea-gates in a windless calm. Styrbiorn stood on the poop of his great ship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ironbeak</i>. She was both longer and taller of build than the other ships, so that every man else in that host must still be looking up at Styrbiorn and Styrbiorn down on them. Huge and dark was the spread of the raven’s wings above his head, fitter for a God than for a mortal man. The mist thinned and broke, and the sun looked over the land’s edge and beamed full on him with the fresh and clear brightness of morning.</p>
			<p>Thyri stood there looking him farewell from the seawall of Jomsburg as the fleet steered west, and she was as a flower that is seen afar lonely on the sheer rock face of some wind-grieved mountain. The fog rolled up again and shut out Thyri and Jomsburg, leaving but a circle of sea about the ships and bright air and sunlight overhead. But as the ships passed out to sea under the outer headland they saw shadowy in the fog above them the shape of Moldi, gazing after them from the limit of the land.</p>
			<p>So on the fourth day, being the thirtieth day appointed, came Styrbiorn back into the Dane-realm, and with him Sigvaldi and Biorn and other lords of the Jomsburgers, and they had five score and eleven ships of all sorts, fully manned. Near upon ten score ships of the Jomsburgers were already there in the Limfirth over against Alaburg, and some seven score of the King’s ships.</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn came aland and went to see Harald the King straightway. The King said, “Wilt thou bridge the Limfirth with thy ships, Styrbiorn?” Styrbiorn said he would have the King call a Thing now forthright in Alaburg. So the King let call a Thing, and when that was done then Styrbiorn let them know what was in his mind to do. “And now,” he said, “I shall look for more than good words from you, father-in-law. There be here three hundred ships of us Jomsburgers ready to fare north with me. And I shall look to you for such furtherance as you may, both in men and ships.”</p>
			<p>“That,” answered King Harald, “must give us a weighty cause to think upon. I seek no quarrel with the Swede-King. In west-viking we of the Dane-realm go our gate, whither we will. But that is an old saying, that the waves of the east sea do chant their songs to please the King of the Swedes.”</p>
			<p>“This is not the answer that will content me,” said Styrbiorn.</p>
			<p>The King said, “Thou hast still that trick, to fill thy purse with other men’s fee.” And he said, “Seeing thou art my son-in-law, for all I am not in this quarrel, we will yet lend you help of two score ships well found and manned.”</p>
			<p>“I must learn thee to leave thy niggishness,” said Styrbiorn then. And this choice he gave them: either that they should fetch him two hundred ships, and that man withal whom he should choose to go with him, either else would Styrbiorn and his host sit down now in the land and dwellings of the Danes and eat up all their substance. “And that will seem a hard choice to you, and harder to bear. Yet shall you find the stronger must rule.”</p>
			<p>In the end, bethinking them that need giveth little choice, the King and his folk said yea to this. Styrbiorn said he would choose his man now to go with him, “And that shall be Harald the King.” The King was mad wroth, but for none of his pleas nor offers would Styrbiorn be moved. Styrbiorn was like a man who, with mind at ease now, sitteth with his hand on the helm steering with a fair wind toward his set resolve.</p>
			<p>The fourth day after these things aforesaid Styrbiorn, with the whole great host of the Jomsburgers and the Danes, sailed for the north. King Harald would have fared aboard of his own ship, but Styrbiorn made him go with him in <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ironbeak</i>. The King had learnt now the wisdom of that saying, “Never strive to match the sea,” and he would contend no more against Styrbiorn. Styrbiorn said to Biorn, “I will trust my father-in-law very discreetly. Till this fight be over, I will keep him by me like a doll. That will be good for him and good for his following. For they will guess well that if they keep not faith with me I will slay him out of hand.”</p>
			<p>So now they rowed out from the haven and down the Limfirth, and so set sail and hove out into the open sea. And first they steered southeastward for the narrow seas betwixt Sealand and Skaney, meaning to coast so along Skaney-side and so north along the land toward Sigtun and Upsala. And that fleet needed wide sea-room to sail, as with foaming wake they stood out from the land, and it was long between the first ship and the last, and between that which steered outermost and that which steered nearest to landward.</p>
			<p>But upon these things did the Danes that were left behind in Jutland sing this stave:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>Ne’er would the Jute-folk<br/>
					Yield gild to swift ships,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till by the land stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sea-deer of Styrbiorn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now must the Dane-lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow that hosting:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Land-lorn and folk-lorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drees he his weird now.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
