<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV: Jomsburg</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Jomsburg</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Palnatoki of Fion dwelt in those days in Jomsburg, and was captain there. A marvellous sure place had he made it, builded with stone walls about and about, and he had, in the gut of the harbour-mouth, a sea-gate like to the gate of a walled town, so as a three hundred long-ships might enter and ride in the harbour within the sea-gate. And in the castle or burg was good houseroom for every man of them that was in the Lay (or, as some say, the Law) of the Jomsburgers, and treasure chambers enow to keep safe the good treasure they brought home thither from their harrying, and store chambers filled with corn and meal and kippered fish and all manner of victual and stores. And there was within that burg a well of fresh water always flowing, and both landward and seaward it was a place not to be fought against, girt about with thick high walls inexpugnable and stone cliffs washed with the sea.</p>
			<p>There was as then with Palnatoki in Jomsburg these lords, to wit: Bui the Thick of Borgundholm and Sigurd Cape, his brother; and Biorn the Brisk; and those three sons of Strut-Harald that was in that time a famous Earl in Skaney, Sigvaldi namely and Heming and Thorkell the High; and these three were brothers-in-law to Bui and Sigurd, since Sigurd had to wife Tofa the daughter of Strut-Harald. Besides these there were in Jomsburg many lords and men of mark, and all in their prime age and with power and means to hand with their will; blood-suppers, every one ready to leap, like a hand-wolf, into his natural wildness: and yet (which indeed made the main strength and anchor of their state) every one ready to leave, in all things of matter, the whole regiment of that burg and host with Palnatoki.</p>
			<p>For every man of them, were he of great estate or were he least among their fellowship, must swear a strong oath to hold by the lay of the Jomsburgers. And therein were these things covenanted:</p>
			<p>First, that there should no man be received in that fellowship older than fifty nor any younger than eighteen winters. Nor yet any that would run from another of like strength and like-weaponed with himself. And thirdly, that every man of them should be sworn to avenge another’s slaying, as though he were his own brother. Fourthly, that none should kindle slander among men there. Fifth, though they should take to a man which had slain father or brother of one that was already there before him, or a kinsman of his, if that came to light after their taking to him, then should the whole award and settlement of this lie with Palnatoki. Also, whatsoever of tidings might thither come, none should be so hardy as tell aught thereof, seeing that it was for Palnatoki alone to tell all tidings. And he that should be found in default touching aught of these things aforesaid, the same should be driven away and turned out of their law. None might have a woman in the burg. Nor none might be abroad longer than three nights but by leave of Palnatoki. Whatsoever they might get with harrying they must bear it to the pole, were it much or little, so it were money’s worth; and if it were shown of any man that he did not so, then must that man be put away and out of their law, were it much or little. No man might speak or utter there any craven word, howsoever hopeless a turn their affair might take. There could not anything befall within the burg of such a kind as that they themselves must shape and settle it, but Palnatoki alone must there rule all things according to his will. Nor might ties of kinship nor of friendship sway the matter if men should wish to come thither who were not in their law; no, not though at the bidding of men already there they should come thither, it no whit availed them if they were not fit.</p>
			<p>So they sat in the burg in good peace, and kept well their laws. They fared abroad every summer a-harrying in this land and in that and gat them good fee and good renown. And they were held for the greatest champions and men of war, and scarcely was any man thought their match in that time.</p>
			<p>Now was summer-day long past of that summer following the things in Sweden we have told of, and they of Jomsburg were home from the sea to discharge their havings and fit their ships anew, and so fare forth again one more voyage afore winter. Palnatoki, walking betimes on the seawall facing the brow of dawn, beheld ships bear down out of the main northeastward under oar and sail: sixty, steering for Jomsburg. There was a land-breeze blowing, light and fitful, and the sea was smooth under Jomsburg walls, with shags fishing and diving and a whirl of white sea-mews screaming and gaffling in the air above them. The ships drew near, till they were come within earshot. And by then were the most of the Jomsburgers stood on the seawall with Palnatoki.</p>
			<p>The greatest of those ships drew in nearest under the wall. She was swart-black and fair with gold, and her sail was striped red and blue and green. Her prow was a drake’s head scaled with black iron and scarlet-tongued and with eyes and crest of shining gold, and the shields that hung along her gunwale from bow to stern were painted with many colours and studded with bronze and iron that blinked in the growing light of morning.</p>
			<p>There stood on her poop a man in a blue kirtle and a ring-byrny of iron, and helmed with an iron helm burnished and inlaid with gold; and his helm was winged with the wings of a buzzard erect and shadowing above either ear. So when his ship was come over against that place whereas those lords of Jomsburg were stood together on the wall, that man uttered command and the oarsmen backed and held her. And he hailed them on the wall.</p>
			<p>Palnatoki gave back his greeting, and asked what man was he, and what countryman.</p>
			<p>Then answered he from the poop, “I am Styrbiorn, whom men call the Swedes’ Champion, son of Olaf the Swede-King. And this is my host, and we be of the Swede-realm.”</p>
			<p>Palnatoki asked what was their errand.</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn answered, they would have guesting there.</p>
			<p>“This is no guesthouse of Jomsburg,” answered Palnatoki. “And I and my mates be no lovers of guests nor guestings.”</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn said, “To him of you that is Toki Palni’s son would I talk: to thee, with the nose like an eagle; or art not thou he?”</p>
			<p>Palnatoki answered, “I am that man.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, and ’tis a bird hath claws,” cried Bui.</p>
			<p>“We be not come hither a-begging,” said Styrbiorn to Palnatoki. “Neither art thou and thine wont to beg whether fee or forbearance at other men’s hands, nor yet the more am I and mine. This is mine errand: to offer you my friendship, and be with you in Jomsburg, and sail with you a-viking.”</p>
			<p>“He stuttereth,” said Bui, “like a pig at the trough.”</p>
			<p>Palnatoki gazed at Styrbiorn a minute narrowly, as a skipper studieth a ship or a horseman a horse. Then said he, “We need no man’s friendship, nor no help of thine. I have heard tell of thee. Thou art not yet grown to man’s estate. What can’st thou do?”</p>
			<p>“I have harried two summers eastaway,” answered Styrbiorn. “And afore that, I slew mine uncle’s outlaw, Lambi the White, that was a sea-king of great note. That was off Skaney-side last summer.”</p>
			<p>Palnatoki asked whence they were come now.</p>
			<p>He answered, “From guesting east in Holmgarth. And we harried summer-long in Biarmaland and Balagarth-Side. And not bootless came we thence.”</p>
			<p>“If hence thou sailest, I think thou’lt leave that booty here,” said Bui.</p>
			<p>Sigvaldi spake: “The ships be manned, Toki. ’Twere well an we rowed out forthright: take these conies, ere they take fright and up scut and away.”</p>
			<p>Earl Wolf, that was by Styrbiorn on the poop, spake in his ear: “This is a rash folly, as I told thee. Seest not how they do lay their noses together in deliberation what to do? And ’tis not for our comfort nor furtherance.”</p>
			<p>“Let be,” said Styrbiorn. And he called out on high to Palnatoki, “Take to us: you shall not find that in seeking friends you found table-guts to eat you and your meat. And you lack a man, I am for you.”</p>
			<p>“Thou art a boy,” shouted Palnatoki then. “Come back in a year or twain, with a beard grown. Then I’ll talk to thee.” But for all his scornful words, he stood looking still on Styrbiorn long and narrowly, as if taken by somewhat in the face of him, or in the carriage and gait of him, or in the voice of his speech. Styrbiorn’s brow blackened at his words.</p>
			<p>Bui let out a great laugh, and cried aloud and said, “Home with thee to thy mammy, crow-chick. If I have not more hair of my tail than thou of thy face, let me end my days in a stinking swine-sty as dry-nurse to the new-weaned yelts.”</p>
			<p>“There be hand-smiters here as well as tongue-smiters,” said Styrbiorn.</p>
			<p>“And I have a switch,” cried Bui, “for to smite thy backside withal.”</p>
			<p>Palnatoki abode yet looking on him from the wall, above the lazy wash and lap of the sea-swell. And now he shouted again to him on the ship and said, “I have told thee I am no lover of guests nor guestings. But my redes are reckoned wholesome. And this is my rede to thee, to put up your helm and get you away from Jomsburg whiles ye may.”</p>
			<p>For answer, Styrbiorn let wear his ship yet closer for easier speech with them on the wall. And now might they have yet clearer sight of him, and of the great growth and strength that was his and the fair and likely seeming of the man, the while he spake with Palnatoki. And this was the end of their talking, that Styrbiorn said he was not minded to turn away from Jomsburg, but if they thought him over young to be had into their law and fellowship, then let them try it out, since by handy-stripes at equal odds is a man best known. And for that, let them row out a long-ship against his with an even number of men to match those that were with him ashipboard: “And do thou, Palnatoki, or whoso amongst you is held for the best man-at-arms, come with that ship to fight with me and my ship. And if thou slay me, there is an end, and my men shall yield up all these chattels and gear that we have fetched from the East aboard our ships. But if I overcome thee and slay thee, then may the Jomsburgers with right and justice take me for captain in thy stead, seeing that I should have shown myself by that deed to be the better man. And these things shall first be made fast betwixt us by strong oaths unto Thor, in whom most of all the Gods I do put my trust. And if there be any other God in whom you of Jomsburg do put your trust more than in Thor, then shall your oaths be unto that God and unto Thor besides.” Styrbiorn made Earl Wolf his foster-father speak all this on his behalf, since he himself made but a poor hand at speeches.</p>
			<p>Now they of Jomsburg spoke many of them against this at first; and most of all Sigvaldi, which was by nature from his youth up crooked of counsel and loved not direct and open dealings, but was as ready for all deceits and flimflams as an oyster for a fresh tide. But Palnatoki, when all was said, spake among them: “Either of two things have we here: that this is a young braggart, or else a wolf-cub after mine own heart. A true word is that, that ‘Upward runs the young man’s path.’ And that is another, ‘Look for a fall when the tree is old.’ I am not the man I have ever known myself if a boy shall beat me. But if that were fated, why then ye were better have him than me. And now I will fight with Styrbiorn, ship to ship.”</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn said to Earl Wolf, “I will not have thee with me in this battle, foster-father. For if ill came to ill, hard put to it were our Swede-folk then, and these that followed me from the East, to hold by our oaths for me, and me battle-slain. But if thou wert there to bridle their high mettle, that might yet be done.”</p>
			<p>“It is wonderful,” said the Earl, “that I do love thee well enough to humour thee even in this.”</p>
			<p>So now was a ram slain and oaths taken betwixt them of either side, calling ancient witnesses to hear their vow: by the southing sun, and by the bright lightning-stream, and by the rock of Victory-Tyr, and by the ring of Ulli. And therewith must each man say, “If I do not according to this oath, then let the ship that saileth under me sail not, though a fair wind blow; and let the sword I draw bite not, save when it shall sing about mine own head. And so let it fare with me as it fareth with a wolf out in the wildwood: poor and joyless and without all meat, save that which is gotten with leaping on carrion corpses.” Right eager was Bui the Thick to be at this battle, but Palnatoki would have none go with him save his own ship’s company only, the same which were wont to man his ship when they went to war. “Thou art more stubborn,” said Sigvaldi, “than a kinked hawser in cold weather. And much thou temptest the fates of death. Yet thou hast ever had good luck in thine undertakings, and may be that shall save thee again.” Palnatoki bade Sigvaldi take command while himself was away, and man the ships and keep them in the harbour; “And see that no man of you is guilty of any unpeaceful deed unless they shall first break oath with us.”</p>
			<p>Now Earl Wolf held his fleet away to the northward, and the Jomsburgers lay in their ships within the open sea-gates. But Palnatoki rowed out with his ship against Styrbiorn’s and they lay aboard of one another and fell to fighting without more ado. But the other ships of either side abode two bowshots’ distance from them of either hand. Palnatoki was a man well skilled with arrow and bow, and three or four men of Styrbiorn’s he slew in that manner ere they were come to handy-strokes. But when they were well grappled ship to ship, then was there a rattle of iron, and weapon play of the sharpest. And now the fight waxed grim and woundsome to men, and they of Palnatoki’s following began to go up upon the ship of Styrbiorn, and many of the Swede-folk gat their deaths.</p>
			<p>There was with Styrbiorn a man named Eystein the Fox, a Norseman by kin out of Halogaland. He had fared abroad from Norway because of Earl Hakon, for he had slain one of the Earl’s men. So he fared east across the Keel, and thence east overseas to Holmgarth. Styrbiorn took to him there in Garthrealm, and thence had him with him when he made war in the coasts of Biarmaland. He was a man well skilled in arms, and most of all with the axe, and was a great manslayer. So now Styrbiorn called Eystein to him in the fight, and biddeth him go with him and put back the vikings out of the ship. Now was the weapon-brunt harder yet than afore as they went forth, and in short space the Jomsburgers were fain to give back some little under that onset. And now was Eystein in the act to have leaped upon Palnatoki’s ship; but Palnatoki thrust at him so hard a thrust with a spear on the boss of his shield that he leaped not well aboard of the ship, but his foot landed in air between the two ships’ sides and he came pitching forward across the gunwale of Palnatoki’s. And in that nick of time, or ever he might right himself, Bessi Thorlakson fetched him with an axe-hammer so mighty a blow on the head that all the brains were beaten out of it. Men say there was a blood-feud of old betwixt those two, Eystein and Bessi, and that Bessi when he smote him cried out these words: “So knock we the harns out of Foxes.”</p>
			<p>With that, Palnatoki egged on his men right fiercely, and himself leaped again aboard of Styrbiorn’s ship and slew a man on this side and on that. And now he drave at Styrbiorn with his spear, but Styrbiorn set his shield against the thrust and budged no whit. Oft said Palnatoki in after-days that never till then, nor never since, had he known the like strength in a man, that he should stand so starkly under the onset of his spear that he budged not an inch aback for all his thrusting. But the Jomsburgers set on now with so fierce an onslaught that no man might withstand them; and it came to this at last, that they cleared Styrbiorn’s ship, in such wise that he himself stood on the poop fronting them alone, but all his men were dead or felled.</p>
			<p>Palnatoki spake: “That is well seen, Styrbiorn, that you did set us a hard sword-game; and this too, that thou art a mighty man of thine hands, and a man of a high heart and a stubborn. And now I will offer thee this, which methinks thou mayest take with much honour: that you shall all go your ways now in peace, and have with you all your ships and gear.”</p>
			<p>“I will not take that,” answered he. “But let me and thee deal now together in single combat. And let all hang on that.”</p>
			<p>“There is danger in that for thee,” said Palnatoki. “For even if God should give thee that glory, to prevail over me, ’tis likely my many brave lads that be here ashipboard with us would be angry with thee beyond all letting or leashing, and they would have thee slain despite all oaths.”</p>
			<p>“Then send them back,” said Styrbiorn, “aboard of thine own ship. And let them take up with them my men that be hurt and tend their wounds. So let them ungrapple their ship and row apart. And thou and I may then try it out at ease among the dead corpses.”</p>
			<p>Palnatoki looked at him and said, “Thou art hurt already. The blood drips from under thy shield down from thy left shoulder. Why wilt thou not take mine offer and sail away?”</p>
			<p>He answered, “It was not in the bargain.”</p>
			<p>“It is sore against my liking,” said Palnatoki, “to send to hell untimely so good a man as thou art, and but for the game’s sake only and thine own pigheadedness. It is in my mind the rather to deliver thee from thine own folly: bid my men bear thee down with their shields, and so save thy life.”</p>
			<p>Said Styrbiorn, “I will not be took alive. Of that be well assured. If that thou beest a man indeed, do as I bid.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Palnatoki, “it is sore against my liking. And think well that I am not the man to spare thee any whit, once the grey silver is aloft betwixt us.”</p>
			<p>“Make haste,” said Styrbiorn, “ere I grow stiff with waiting.”</p>
			<p>So the Jomsburgers at Palnatoki’s command gat them back aboard of their own ship, and had along with them all those of Styrbiorn’s shipmates that were yet alive: and not one of those was able for his wounds to stand upon his feet and wield weapon.</p>
			<p>Palnatoki and Styrbiorn stood now foot to foot on the poop of Styrbiorn’s ship. Styrbiorn said, “Thou shalt strike the first blow.”</p>
			<p>“None ever made me that offer till now,” answered Palnatoki; “and from thee I will no wise take it.” Styrbiorn heaved up his sword and aimed at him a great round-armed swashing stroke, but he caught it slantwise on his shield and it glented aside in air off the shield’s boss. Then Palnatoki hewed at him with a downstroke on the helm, but the sword did not bite, but glanced down the helm and smote off from it the left wing and so crashed onward towards Styrbiorn’s shoulder, but he caught it with his shield and turned it. “There winged I the hawk,” said Palnatoki then.</p>
			<p>And now for some while they bandied great blows, but well they warded them, so that no stroke came well home and neither was hurt. Yet was Styrbiorn bleeding from his former wound in the left shoulder, and for all his strength and fierceness he moved somewhat more heavily as the fight went on, as if his wound irked him and the loss of blood; and his face waxed wondrous dark and grim, and his breath began to come in great pants and snorts. Yet never the lighter fell his sword. But Palnatoki was light and slender of limb, yet exceeding strong withal, as if his sinews were bands of iron; and for all he was now well three-and-forty winters old, he was with all his war-gear light of foot as a boy at the ball-play, and leaped in and out like a cat; until, leaping backward from one of Styrbiorn’s mighty flail-sweeps of his sword, his foot came down in a slime of half-clotted gore, slid from under him like a skate on new ice, and landed him flat on his back with his enemy sprung over him weapon in hand.</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn gave backwards a pace and lowered his sword. His face looked grey now, that was so red, and he spake through gritted teeth. “Stand thou up, and let us play out the play.” He leaned, with his right hand that gripped the sword-hilt, heavily on the ship’s gunwale. The timbers quivered under his hand.</p>
			<p>Palnatoki leaped lightly to his feet again, and faced him again with sword and shield. Looking with his eagle eyes on Styrbiorn, he said, “It will be better for us to give over now. Wise is he that can read the signs of the Gods.”</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn said, “Thou art a good man, Palnatoki. I would not do a dastard’s deed by thee. But let us play out the play.”</p>
			<p>Palnatoki let fall his sword with a clatter among the stretchers and came to Styrbiorn with open hand: “Better side by side shall the swords of us two bite, than one against the other.”</p>
			<p>Styrbiorn, all fordone with weariness and bloodletting, had scarce might to grip hands with him.</p>
			<p>By then were the fleets of either part rowed up, and great clamour was there, and much likelihood it seemed of a battle-royal now betwixt them. For Earl Wolf and his folk, when they had seen the ships part and the ship of the Jomsburgers row away, were at a set and knew not what to make of it, and so put their ships in motion, meaning to see closer at hand the ending of this matter. Which when Sigvaldi beheld, he bade all row out of harbour and make ready to set upon them out of hand anon, since it was clear that these Swedes were going about to break truce with them and bewray Palnatoki. And certain it is, it had been short work of Earl Wolf and Styrbiorn’s host had they foughten it out there against the men of Jomsburg.</p>
			<p>But Palnatoki standing high on the poop of Styrbiorn’s ship there, his hand in Styrbiorn’s, shouted to them of both sides with his voice that was like a trumpet of brass, clear thundering through the hubbub of voices and clanking oars and waves awash and gurgling, letting them know the fight was done, and peace given to Styrbiorn. So they harkened to Palnatoki and obeyed his word.</p>
			<p>Now they rowed back, and looked to their wounds, and Palnatoki leeched them that were badly hurt, for he was skilled in leechcraft as in many a matter beside. But the slain they brought ashore in the ships and laid them in howe by the seashore a little east of Jomsburg. But Styrbiorn and well an hundred of his men that were of right age and the likeliest among them, these they took into Jomsburg to be vikings of Jomsburg from that day forth. Men say that never before was any man had into Jomsburg that was less than eighteen winters old, nor, after Styrbiorn, was any man else had in by them under age save only Vagn Akison alone. But Palnatoki took to Styrbiorn after their fight together, for he said that never such a man-at-arms had he known in all his life aforetime, and he said that there should be no counting of age for such a champion as Styrbiorn had shown himself to be. And dear friendship grew up between Palnatoki and Styrbiorn, and there was good liking and friendship between Styrbiorn and all those lords of Jomsburg. Styrbiorn was with them in their harrying now until winter, and gat renown, and that winter he sat with Palnatoki in Fion.</p>
			<p>Now that same year in Upsala, at winter’s end, Queen Sigrid bare a son to Eric the King.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
