<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Note</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Note</h2>
			<p>When Biorn came out over the sea, he went south to Denmark, and then south further to Jomsburg, and in those days was Palnatoki captain of the Jomsburg vikings. Biorn entered into covenant with them, and was called a champion there. He was in Jomsburg when Styrbiorn the Strong won it and he went to Sweden when they of Jomsburg gave aid to Styrbiorn, and was withal at the battle at Fyrisfield where Styrbiorn fell, and fled thence to the woods with the other Jomsburg vikings. (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eyrbyggja Saga</i>, <abbr>transl.</abbr> William Morris and Eirikr Magnússon: <abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span>.)</p>
			<p>Then Harald Gormson laid Norway to his own realm and revenue, and yet we deemed King Harald Gormson as of lesser might than the Upsala kings, inasmuch as Styrbiorn, our kinsman, cowed him, so that Harald became his man; but Eric the Victorious, my father, strode over the head of Styrbiorn when they tried it out between them. (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Heimskringla</i>, same <abbr>transl.</abbr>: <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 2, <abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXI</span>: speech of Olaf the Swede-King to Hialti Skeggison.)</p>
			<p>In the old Northern tongue <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">ei</i> is pronounced as in the English “rein”: <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">v</i> like the English <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">w</i>: and <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">j</i> like the English <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">y</i>: <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">g</i> is always hard. The final <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">i</i> in proper names (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> Helgi) is short. Moldi is pronounced “mouldy”: Jomsburg, “Yõmsburg.” The <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">y</i> in Fyrisfield and in Thyri is short as in “syrup.”</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">
					<abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">E. R. E.</abbr>
				</p>
				<p>Sidmouth, 2 January, <time>1926</time>.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
